---
layout: post
title:  "The Utility of Open Dialogue"
author: "Derek Fake & Gina Arnold"
date:   2017-05-05 12:14:01 -0400
category: "Spring 2018"
---
Over the past few years, our nation has revisited the question of what type of speech should be given a platform. The Charles Murray lecture, as well as the disinvitation of two queer activists, has ignited the question of free speech on our campus. As a Villanovan, I’ve felt the same call as my peers to reflect on this issue. I am an engineering student and a political centrist; I’m not the type to obsess over the trivialities of politics. Yet, the debate on allowable speech feels like it’s too important to ignore. I’ve found the response from both students and faculty to be concerning as it points to the larger problem of an unsuccessful (if not totally absent) dialogue between ideologically opposed groups. The political discourse on our campus is insular, but it has the potential to bridge differences, forge understanding, and build a stronger Villanova community.

 Having attended the Charles Murray lecture, I witnessed the full spectrum of Villanova community members.  The talk appeared as though it would begin undisturbed, but what started as a loud purposeful cough grew into protesters disrupting the lecture by covering Murray’s podium with a sign and overriding his voice.  The tension and discomfort was real.  Once the lecture progressed it became evident that the lecture was unrelated to the protests that they spawned.  To those uninterested in classical liberalism in the Trump era, the speech may even be described as mundane.

 In light of this event and the evident fracturing of community on our campus, we can all agree that a more harmonious Villanova community is an ideal worth striving for. Harmony is not characterized by the dominance of a single perspective. Rather, harmony is the result of allowing differing perspectives to be heard. It is the result of caring about each unique and necessary voice. Unfortunately, the current mood on campus is what is often called “Villanova nice”: a pervasive political apathy and patronizing politeness. This attitude among students is not problematic because students do not care about issues of justice – it is problematic because people have opinions but choose to conceal them. Concealing the truth out of politeness is a disservice that hinders intellectual and moral development. Distasteful thoughts lay dormant and unchallenged. It is important that everyone be allowed to speak, no matter how horrendous their beliefs. This is necessary for challenging the unsavory thoughts that lay in the minds of people who are too agreeable to speak up. The importance of controversial speakers becomes evident because it normalizes sharing how we think. How can we challenge each other to dismantle preconceived notions if no one dares to speak out about them? Tolerating the intolerable allows the intolerable concepts to be reshaped and reformed.  

 If the truth exists—as the existence of acceptable and unacceptable tenets would suggest—then the utility of free speech is a means for striving ever closer to determining what it is. Censorship in any form, whether of Murray or the uninvited queer speakers, is terrifying because it hinders our ability to discover the truth; without open debate we are prone to falling into our own unchecked ideologies. The current hyperpolarization between the nation’s two primary political parties serves as a dangerous example of unchecked ideological drifting. The political right does not care about what the political left thinks of its ideas, while the left no longer cares about what the right thinks of its ideas.  Neither side seeks discourse with the opposing party because the language that each group uses has become so divergent. We lack a common language to speak with someone with diametrically opposing viewpoints from our own. This undermines the persuasiveness of both sides of the political spectrum. Any discussion is likely to become a rhetorical dance around an issue rather than mutual understanding of the other’s perspective. Censorship, whether enforced or self-enforced, allows this divergence to occur and grow wider over time.

 When we stop defending the rationale behind supposedly obvious ideas, they become vulnerable to previously disproven ideas. We can see this phenomenon happening now. The right is confronting resurgent nationalism from the alt-right while the left is confronting resurgent illiberal Marxist theory. Stigma of various methods of thought is used to combat these long dead ideologies instead of reason and logic. Censorship (through social stigma or through the banning of contentious speakers) of distasteful perspectives is the direct cause of the death of logic in cross-ideological debate. Furthermore, advocating for censorship of any form justifies your own censorship. The calls to silence Murray can equally be waged against those who call for the silencing.  We should not be afraid of any ideology or pattern of thought because if our ideas can be so easily demolished by freedom of speech, then it is far more likely the ideas were never true or cohesive to begin with.

 Some students and faculty on our campus have argued that certain ideas should not be given a platform at a private university. They were not arguing against the constitutional right to free speech per se, so much as they were arguing about who is qualified to speak on our campus. Shouldn’t a book like _The Bell Curve_ immediately bar the author from any sort of serious platform? Those of us who support open debate would answer that a platform is not an endorsement—it’s an arena. The competing perspectives have the opportunity to argue why the controversial speaker is wrong and to provide the rational arguments for their own beliefs. Only ideologies that lack any sort of internal logic or foundational truth need to rely on censorship to preserve their persuasiveness.

 At the heart of a liberal arts education lies the belief that the truth exists, can be known, and is worth seeking. Without strict pursuit of and adherence to the truth about reality, we lack the intellectual foundation on which to strive for the good life. Freedom of speech is often about determining the truth of political issues and social justice, but it has a higher purpose. We need to challenge each other on our conception of reality and our place in it. Open dialogue on the most fundamental questions of human existence is essential for the individual to properly order the good in his or her life. Moreover, freedom of speech allows us to openly explore questions on the nature of the ideal community. If we wish to knit Villanova community together with something stronger than the feigned “Villanova niceness” we have presently, we need not look further than this fundamental premise: censorship of any form has no place here.
